Source:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NoSQL

A NoSQL (often interpreted as Not only SQL) database provides a mechanism for storage and retrieval of data that is modeled in means other than the tabular relations used in relational databases.

Motivations for this approach include simplicity of design, horizontal scaling, and finer control over availability. The data structures used by NoSQL databases (e.g. key-value, graph, or document) differ from those used in relational databases, making some operations faster in NoSQL and others faster in relational databases. The particular suitability of a given NoSQL database depends on the problem it must solve.

NoSQL databases are increasingly used in big data and real-time web applications.[3] NoSQL systems are also called "Not only SQL" to emphasize that they may also support SQL-like query languages.

Many NoSQL stores compromise consistency (in the sense of the CAP theorem) in favor of availability and partition tolerance. Barriers to the greater adoption of NoSQL stores include the use of low-level query languages, the lack of standardized interfaces, and huge investments in existing SQL.[4] Most NoSQL stores lack true ACID transactions, although a few recent systems, such as FairCom c-treeACE, Google Spanner (though technically a NewSQL database), FoundationDB and OrientDB have made them central to their designs. (See ACID and JOIN Support.)

Example:
There have been various approaches to classify NoSQL databases, each with different categories and subcategories. Because of the variety of approaches and overlaps it is difficult to get and maintain an overview of non-relational databases. Nevertheless, a basic classification is based on data model. A few examples in each category are:

Column: Accumulo, Cassandra, Druid, HBase, Vertica
Document: Lotus Notes, Clusterpoint, Apache CouchDB, Couchbase, HyperDex, MarkLogic, MongoDB, OrientDB, Qizx
Key-value: CouchDB, Dynamo, FoundationDB, HyperDex, MemcacheDB, Redis, Riak, FairCom c-treeACE, Aerospike, OrientDB, MUMPS
Graph: Allegro, Neo4J, InfiniteGraph, OrientDB, Virtuoso, Stardog
Multi-model: OrientDB, FoundationDB, ArangoDB, Alchemy Database, CortexDB
